_drafts/restless-restfull.md, before:

# The RESTless struggle for RESTfullness

This post will be about my history trying to understand
REST and RESTfullness (whatever that is, spoiler alert, I'm
not going to define what it is), what worked for me and
what sidetracked me.

As I evolve my ideas over time do not confuse that with
me being sure of anything, I'm still not sure of shit
until now, the only thing I'm sure is that going back
is not a good idea, but where would be forward is another
history.

I decided to write this because I think it is a very important
topic (duh, obviously or I would be an idiot for wasting time no ? =P).
Not REST of RESTfull, but defining good API's on a distributed system.
Having good abstractions and a good environment are essencial to
build a truly scalable distributed system. Not only scalable on
the sense of supporting millions of users, but cognitively scalable,
a system that very limited humans beings can understand. An example
of this idea can be found on
[Dijkstra's The Humble Programmer](https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~EWD/transcriptions/EWD03xx/EWD340.html)
where he uses the term "intellectual manageability".

For me this is one of the holy grails of computing,
a great deal of our pain is caused by our feeble brains
and it difficulty on handling details. And to help ourselves
people that are usually attracted to computing do not have a
lot of skills with human psychology and cognition,
they like computers and math (nothing wrong with that),
but the problem is related to human cognition, that is the bottleneck
on most systems not the computers (of course sometimes it is the computers,
but on the industry the bottleneck is people by far).

Why talk about cognition before talking about REST ? Well it is another
spoiler alert, but REST is an architecture for a system with massive scalability
(the internet), almost all companies that you will work will not work on that
scale, the closes you would get would be Google. So there is a great deal
of chance that when you are contemplating REST you are not thinking about
scaling to billions of requests but thinking on how to make your
system easy to understand, to make intentions clear.

But enough with spoilers and start with ancient history.

# On the beginning there was REST

OK it is not that ancient, the year is 2008 and I had the
opportunity to take an internship on an awesome company.
Since I don't seem to run out of luck in life, I had the opportunity
to work with a lot of new projects, developing from scratch, defining
protocols, etc. Of course I was not doing it alone, I was just the curious
talkative intern, there where much wiser people guiding me.

Some of the projects where restricted to internal proprietary protocols,
others where using RTMP (thank God that is over), but we faced some opportunity
to do what all the other cool kids where doing, shiny new REST API's.
At that time it as so well established that WS-\* stuff and SOAP where pure
evil that I didn't even bother to look that up too much and delve directly
on REST and its blazing glory.

When you have no idea what you are doing because something is new
to you the first instinct is too come up with a set of rules to
avoid stupid mistakes and to avoid handling with context that
you can't understand yet, this fits with the
[Dreyfus Model Of Skill Acquisition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dreyfus_model_of_skill_acquisition).

Searching for guidance on this aspect we found several guidelines
that helped us build our own. At this stage there was just
some web searching. The guidelines where sound, that usual stuff
of handling collections of stuff and individual stuff on a
hierarchical way using URL's, the traditional dogs example:

Getting all dogs:

```
GET
/myapi/dogs
```

Getting individual dog:

```
GET
/myapi/dogs/someid
```

Using verbs on URL names mean you got everything wrong and was a bad bad
developer, you where not thinking on the RESTFull way and should feel
bad about yourself. There was a **LOT** of focus on the CRUD thing too,
on how the HTTP methods should be used correctly. Not that these are
bad ideas, it is a good idea to have a uniform system where the intentions
are clear. No one wants to use the **DELETE** method to get some data, etc.
But I started to get frustrated on how almost all material that I was reading
focused way too much on URL's naming and HTTP verbs.

They always explain the collection of resources thing, and them how to related
resources, like the dog has an owner, how to express that ? Again, not that it
is a bad idea to think on how to properly handle this kind of relationship, but to
be honest it was not one of my biggest problems at the time. Actually if
you squint you will see that discussing this is the same as discussing how
to organize data on a database.

Since URL's are hierarchical you will have similar problems to when you
represent sets of information (or resources) that have relationships between
them using a document oriented database (hierarchical). You will need to think
if you always send the resource with its related resources embedded, or return
links, there will be tradeoff's with each approach, etc. There is a good space
for discussion on this area, and it is good discussion, depending on the
kind of system you are developing different sets of tradeoff's must be made.

But even though this is an interesting space of discussion I was growing
frustrated. Why ? Well because I was not developing a database with a REST API.
It was not just a set of static data, or static data with relationships between
it. I was still all alone on how to model processes.

Now things get interesting. At least for me, you must be already dozing off =P.

# Who ate my process ?

On the land of substantives and resources there seems to have little
space for processes, they tend to be verbs since they do stuff with
your data to produce some other data, or just change the state
of a system (OMG state ? but isn't REST stateless ? it took me some
time to understand that, but it is basically because I'm stupid, and
very little material makes this really clear too).

I felt stuck on discussions on how to use status codes and which
HTTP methods to use. Again, not that this is necessarily bad, but
it crossed the point of being useful and started to feel like
bike shedding, specially when compared with the tremendous difficulty
that I was feeling on how to actually solve a problem being "RESTFull".
I was very used to solve problems with data + algorithms and it seemed
that I was being presented only with the data part of the idea + the
bike shedding on how to properly use methods and status codes. It is
important to do CRUD stuff consistently, but to be honest it is boring
as hell discussing CRUD stuff.

I remember something like linkedin using 9XX status codes, twitter using
only POST and GET and no other methods and some sacred quest for the
true RESTFull way to do stuff (create your own status codes ?
use all methods ?).

One example that I remember vaguely (bad memory + 8 years) is how to
model on a REST API transferring a call on a PBX API. I do not even
remember how we solved, I just remember that I was frustrated, specially
because all that talk about methods and substantives was not helping me
at all on how to design it properly.

In the midst of this suffering a friend of mine recommended the
[REST in Practice](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0596805829) which helped
me a lot to understand something that seemed much more interesting than
the CRUD stuff.

# State Machines Everywhere

As I read the book it explained much better the
[Richardson Maturity Model](https://martinfowler.com/articles/richardsonMaturityModel.html).
Specially because it did that with much more detail and explaining it
like a series of tradeoffs instead of a quest for glory.

The Richardson Maturity Model already starts to give a hint on what is
wrong with most talks about REST, the maturity part will make you feel
immature when your problem do not fit the abstraction. RPC for example
is portraited as a swamp, perhaps it is if you use HTTP to transport it
and use XML, but when you are young it is pretty hard to understand
the difference and it is pretty easy to develop the notion that RPC is bad
(specially with some bad implementations of RPC and remote objects).

Perhaps the notion of maturity is intended to be used inside a REST API,
but most people that advocate RESTFullness takes it as a maturity of any API.

When you start to grown up you start to see that there are no demons,
so RPC is not a demon and REST is not the glorious light that will
vanquish it, but more on that later, lets focus on the REST learning
(have I mentioned how I'm slow to learn ?).

Anyway, I was finally getting the idea behind [HATEOAS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HATEOAS)
(which is also known as the worse acronym ever created) and was excited
because for the first time there was something on all the REST talk
that was actually useful.

OK I'm exaggerating, it is not that the CRUD and status code talk does
not have some usefulness, but compared to the idea of designing cool
state machines that helps enforce decoupling of clients and servers is
so exciting that it got me frustrated how people talk so little about this.
Actually usually there is not talk at all about this aspect of REST.

An example that was the tooling for writing docs ate the time (CIRCA 2010-2011),
they where pretty beautiful (like swagger) but they had 0 support to the
idea of designing a state machine with links driving the next possible states.
That frustrated the hell out of me (of course I can be only lousy at looking stuff
on the internet,perhaps there was something, but I didn't found it).

The best that I found as inspiration was the
[JSON HAL](http://stateless.co/hal_specification.html) specification that I used
as a inspiration for an API that I was developing at the time.

Inspiration because I did not used it. It was simply too much for an API that
was going to be used internally by less than a hundred clients, a lot of it
seems focused on internet scale stuff and I was not building
internet scale stuff.

But the idea of expressing the state machine in-band on the protocol
of the API is applicable on any scale. The alternative would be to
document a series of URL templates (creates more coupling) and document
in which states some of the URL's would be available and when it was not.

Using the HATEOAS idea I was able to decouple clients from internal details
on how resources are organized on the service and also from details of
which states some interactions where possible or not, the protocol embedded
that on the answers. This does not solve all problems on earth, but it was
the first time that I was actually feeling good about this
REST stuff, life was good.

After some time I even started to feel stupid on how I did not get
the HATEOAS idea before. What is great about navigating in the internet
is the fact that you do not need to know anything about the site you
are visiting, only the initial entry point. After that you can understand
what you can do (the docs, on sites usually text intended to humans =P)
and have links that you can click to express your desire to change state
(or not if you just want to load a different resource).

But the eternal bike shedding on REST methods was not over yet.
And there was still the pain of ostracizing verbs, an URL is a
Uniform Resource Location, RESOURCE, so it can't be a verb...
fuck you if it is a verb.

# What the hell is a resource ?


# RESTing from REST

Perhaps, in the end, this is just the normal process of learning something.
Or I'm just stupid. But things started to go sideways for me when I stopped
to think on the problem that I was solving and started thinking on how
to be RESTFull. When the problem did not fitted my poor model of what is
RESTFull (whatever that actually is) I was kinda depressed, felt shame about
my API, lost a lot of time trying to make it RESTFull and even made it
worse for the sake of being RESTFull.

Commit message:

Add more material on bike shedding

_drafts/restless-restfull.md, after:

# The RESTless struggle for RESTfullness

This post will be about my history trying to understand
REST and RESTfullness (whatever that is, spoiler alert, I'm
not going to define what it is), what worked for me and
what sidetracked me.

As I evolve my ideas over time do not confuse that with
me being sure of anything, I'm still not sure of shit
until now, the only thing I'm sure is that going back
is not a good idea, but where would be forward is another
history.

I decided to write this because I think it is a very important
topic (duh, obviously or I would be an idiot for wasting time no ? =P).
Not REST of RESTfull, but defining good API's on a distributed system.
Having good abstractions and a good environment are essencial to
build a truly scalable distributed system. Not only scalable on
the sense of supporting millions of users, but cognitively scalable,
a system that very limited humans beings can understand. An example
of this idea can be found on
[Dijkstra's The Humble Programmer](https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~EWD/transcriptions/EWD03xx/EWD340.html)
where he uses the term "intellectual manageability".

For me this is one of the holy grails of computing,
a great deal of our pain is caused by our feeble brains
and it difficulty on handling details. And to help ourselves
people that are usually attracted to computing do not have a
lot of skills with human psychology and cognition,
they like computers and math (nothing wrong with that),
but the problem is related to human cognition, that is the bottleneck
on most systems not the computers (of course sometimes it is the computers,
but on the industry the bottleneck is people by far).

Why talk about cognition before talking about REST ? Well it is another
spoiler alert, but REST is an architecture for a system with massive scalability
(the internet), almost all companies that you will work will not work on that
scale, the closes you would get would be Google. So there is a great deal
of chance that when you are contemplating REST you are not thinking about
scaling to billions of requests but thinking on how to make your
system easy to understand, to make intentions clear.

But enough with spoilers and start with ancient history.

# On the beginning there was REST

OK it is not that ancient, the year is 2008 and I had the
opportunity to take an internship on an awesome company.
Since I don't seem to run out of luck in life, I had the opportunity
to work with a lot of new projects, developing from scratch, defining
protocols, etc. Of course I was not doing it alone, I was just the curious
talkative intern, there where much wiser people guiding me.

Some of the projects where restricted to internal proprietary protocols,
others where using RTMP (thank God that is over), but we faced some opportunity
to do what all the other cool kids where doing, shiny new REST API's.
At that time it as so well established that WS-\* stuff and SOAP where pure
evil that I didn't even bother to look that up too much and delve directly
on REST and its blazing glory.

When you have no idea what you are doing because something is new
to you the first instinct is too come up with a set of rules to
avoid stupid mistakes and to avoid handling with context that
you can't understand yet, this fits with the
[Dreyfus Model Of Skill Acquisition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dreyfus_model_of_skill_acquisition).

Searching for guidance on this aspect we found several guidelines
that helped us build our own. At this stage there was just
some web searching. The guidelines where sound, that usual stuff
of handling collections of stuff and individual stuff on a
hierarchical way using URL's, the traditional dogs example:

Getting all dogs:

```
GET
/myapi/dogs
```

Getting individual dog:

```
GET
/myapi/dogs/someid
```

Using verbs on URL names mean you got everything wrong and was a bad bad
developer, you where not thinking on the RESTFull way and should feel
bad about yourself. There was a **LOT** of focus on the CRUD thing too,
on how the HTTP methods should be used correctly. Not that these are
bad ideas, it is a good idea to have a uniform system where the intentions
are clear. No one wants to use the **DELETE** method to get some data, etc.
But I started to get frustrated on how almost all material that I was reading
focused way too much on URL's naming and HTTP verbs.

They always explain the collection of resources thing, and them how to related
resources, like the dog has an owner, how to express that ? Again, not that it
is a bad idea to think on how to properly handle this kind of relationship, but to
be honest it was not one of my biggest problems at the time. Actually if
you squint you will see that discussing this is the same as discussing how
to organize data on a database.

Since URL's are hierarchical you will have similar problems to when you
represent sets of information (or resources) that have relationships between
them using a document oriented database (hierarchical). You will need to think
if you always send the resource with its related resources embedded, or return
links, there will be tradeoff's with each approach, etc. There is a good space
for discussion on this area, and it is good discussion, depending on the
kind of system you are developing different sets of tradeoff's must be made.

But even though this is an interesting space of discussion I was growing
frustrated. Why ? Well because I was not developing a database with a REST API.
It was not just a set of static data, or static data with relationships between
it. I was still all alone on how to model processes.

Now things get interesting. At least for me, you must be already dozing off =P.

# Who ate my process ?

On the land of substantives and resources there seems to have little
space for processes, they tend to be verbs since they do stuff with
your data to produce some other data, or just change the state
of a system (OMG state ? but isn't REST stateless ? it took me some
time to understand that, but it is basically because I'm stupid, and
very little material makes this really clear too).

I felt stuck on discussions on how to use status codes and which
HTTP methods to use. Again, not that this is necessarily bad, but
it crossed the point of being useful and started to feel like
bike shedding, specially when compared with the tremendous difficulty
that I was feeling on how to actually solve a problem being "RESTFull".
I was very used to solve problems with data + algorithms and it seemed
that I was being presented only with the data part of the idea + the
bike shedding on how to properly use methods and status codes. It is
important to do CRUD stuff consistently, but to be honest it is boring
as hell discussing CRUD stuff.

I remember something like linkedin using 9XX status codes, twitter using
only POST and GET and no other methods and some sacred quest for the
true RESTFull way to do stuff (create your own status codes ?
use all methods ?).

One example that I remember vaguely (bad memory + 8 years) is how to
model on a REST API transferring a call on a PBX API. I do not even
remember how we solved, I just remember that I was frustrated, specially
because all that talk about methods and substantives was not helping me
at all on how to design it properly.

In the midst of this suffering a friend of mine recommended the
[REST in Practice](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0596805829) which helped
me a lot to understand something that seemed much more interesting than
the CRUD stuff.

# State Machines Everywhere

As I read the book it explained much better the
[Richardson Maturity Model](https://martinfowler.com/articles/richardsonMaturityModel.html).
Specially because it did that with much more detail and explaining it
like a series of tradeoffs instead of a quest for glory.

The Richardson Maturity Model already starts to give a hint on what is
wrong with most talks about REST, the maturity part will make you feel
immature when your problem do not fit the abstraction. RPC for example
is portraited as a swamp, perhaps it is if you use HTTP to transport it
and use XML, but when you are young it is pretty hard to understand
the difference and it is pretty easy to develop the notion that RPC is bad
(specially with some bad implementations of RPC and remote objects).

Perhaps the notion of maturity is intended to be used inside a REST API,
but most people that advocate RESTFullness takes it as a maturity of any API.

When you start to grown up you start to see that there are no demons,
so RPC is not a demon and REST is not the glorious light that will
vanquish it, but more on that later, lets focus on the REST learning
(have I mentioned how I'm slow to learn ?).

Anyway, I was finally getting the idea behind [HATEOAS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HATEOAS)
(which is also known as the worse acronym ever created) and was excited
because for the first time there was something on all the REST talk
that was actually useful.

OK I'm exaggerating, it is not that the CRUD and status code talk does
not have some usefulness, but compared to the idea of designing cool
state machines that helps enforce decoupling of clients and servers is
so exciting that it got me frustrated how people talk so little about this.
Actually usually there is not talk at all about this aspect of REST.

An example that was the tooling for writing docs ate the time (CIRCA 2010-2011),
they where pretty beautiful (like swagger) but they had 0 support to the
idea of designing a state machine with links driving the next possible states.
That frustrated the hell out of me (of course I can be only lousy at looking stuff
on the internet,perhaps there was something, but I didn't found it).

The best that I found as inspiration was the
[JSON HAL](http://stateless.co/hal_specification.html) specification that I used
as a inspiration for an API that I was developing at the time.

Inspiration because I did not used it. It was simply too much for an API that
was going to be used internally by less than a hundred clients, a lot of it
seems focused on internet scale stuff and I was not building
internet scale stuff.

But the idea of expressing the state machine in-band on the protocol
of the API is applicable on any scale. The alternative would be to
document a series of URL templates (creates more coupling) and document
in which states some of the URL's would be available and when it was not.

Using the HATEOAS idea I was able to decouple clients from internal details
on how resources are organized on the service and also from details of
which states some interactions where possible or not, the protocol embedded
that on the answers. This does not solve all problems on earth, but it was
the first time that I was actually feeling good about this
REST stuff, life was good.

After some time I even started to feel stupid on how I did not get
the HATEOAS idea before. What is great about navigating in the internet
is the fact that you do not need to know anything about the site you
are visiting, only the initial entry point. After that you can understand
what you can do (the docs, on sites usually text intended to humans =P)
and have links that you can click to express your desire to change state
(or not if you just want to load a different resource). The name REST
has State Transfer on it, how can we give so little attention to that
and focus on representing collections of stuff ? The theory behind the
[bike shedding phenomenon](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/bikeshedding)
is that because it is easier and it is easy
to discuss eternally easy stuff.

But the eternal bike shedding on REST methods was not over yet.
And there was still the pain of ostracizing verbs, an URL is a
Uniform Resource Location, RESOURCE, so it can't be a verb...
fuck you and your API if it is a verb.

# What the hell is a resource ?

# What about the methods ?

# RESTing from REST

Perhaps, in the end, this is just the normal process of learning something.
Or I'm just stupid. But things started to go sideways for me when I stopped
to think on the problem that I was solving and started thinking on how
to be RESTFull. When the problem did not fitted my poor model of what is
RESTFull (whatever that actually is) I was kinda depressed, felt shame about
my API, lost a lot of time trying to make it RESTFull and even made it
worse for the sake of being RESTFull.
